the following content is provided under
a Creative Commons license your support
will help MIT open courseware continue
to offer highquality educational
resources for free to make a donation or
view additional materials from hundreds
of MIT courses visit mitop courseware at
ocw.mit.edu all right today we do NP
completeness an entire field in one
lecture uh should be fun I actually
taught an entire class about this topic
last semester but now we're going to do
it in 80 minutes um and we're GNA look
at lots of different problems from Super
Mario Brothers to jigsaw puzzles and
show that they're MP complete uh this is
a fun area as shy mentioned last class
it's all about reductions it's all about
converting one problem into another
which is a fun kind of puzzle in itself
it's an algorithm Challenge and uh we're
going to do it a lot uh but first i'm
going to remind you of some of the
things you learned from 006 and tell you
what we need to do in order to prove uh
all of these relations what exactly we
need to show for each of those arrows
and why it's
interesting so uh this is generally
around the P versus NP problem so
remember p is all the problems we know
how to solve in polinomial time well not
just the ones we know how to solve but
all the ones that can be
solved which is pretty
much uh which is the topic of 66 and
6046 up till now but from now in the
next few lectures we'll be talking about
problems that are probably not polom
solvable and what to do about them uh
polinomial as you know is like n to the
Su constant polinomial good exponential
bad um
there uh what is n i guess n is the size
of the
problem okay which we'll have to be a
little bit careful about today and then
[Music]
NP is not problem solvable not in
polinomial time but it's problem
solvable in non-deterministic polinomial
time so uh and in this case we need to
focus on a particular type of problem
which is decision problems
decision just means that the answer is
either yes or no so it's a single bit
answer we'll see why we need to restrict
to that kind of problem in a moment uh
and
uh so this is problems you can solve in
polinomial Time same notion of
polinomial some notion of n but in a
totally unrealistic model of computation
which is a non-deterministic model in a
non-deterministic model what you can do
is uh say instead of computing something
from something you know you can make a
guess so you can
uh
guess uh
one out of polom many
options in constant time
so normally constant time operation a
regular model is like you add two
numbers or you do an if that sort of
thing here we can make a guess I give I
give the computer polom many options I'm
interested in computer's going to give
me one of them it's going to give me a
good guess guess is guaranteed to be
good and good means here that I want to
get to a yes answer if I can so the
formal statement is
if any
guess uh would lead
to a yes
answer then
uh we get such a
guess okay this is weird and it's
asymmetric it's bi us towards yes and
this is why we can only think about
decision problems yes or no you could
buy us WS no you get something else
called Co NP but we'll focus here just
on NP so the idea is uh I'd really like
to find a guess that leads to a yes
answer and the Machine magically gives
me one if there is one which means if I
end up saying no that means there was
absolutely no path that would lead to a
yes so uh when you get a no you get a
lot of information when you get a yes
you get some information but hey you
were lucky hard to hard to complain so
this in6 I often call this the lucky
model of computation
that's the informal version but
nondeterminism is what's really going on
here
so uh maybe it's useful to think to get
an example so here's a problem we'll
this is probably this is the sort of
granddaddy of all MP complete problems
we'll get to completeness in a moment uh
threat
sat stands for
satisfiability so in threat the input to
the problem looks something like this
I'm just going to give an
example and in case you've forgotten
your weird logic notation this is an
and these are
ores uh and I'm using this for
negation
not okay so uh in other words my I'm
given a formula which is an and of ores
and each or Clause only has three things
in it these things are called literals
and a literal is either a variable X
subi or it's the negation of a variable
not X
subi okay so this is a typical example
you could have no negations you could
here I have one negation two negations
any number of negations per Clause these
groups of three these or of three things
three literals are called
Clauses and uh they're all anded
together and my goal is this should be a
decision question so I have a yes or no
question and that question is uh can you
set the
variables uh so there
X1 uh
to true or false so each variable I get
to choose or true or a false
designation uh such that the formula
comes out true
I use T and F for true and false uh so I
want to set these variables such that
every Clause comes out true because
they're anded together so I have to
satisfy this clause in one of three ways
maybe I satisfy it all three ways
doesn't matter as long as at least one
of these should be true and at least one
of each Clause should be true okay so
that's the threap problem this is a hard
problem we don't know a polinomial time
algorithm there probably isn't one but
there is a polinomial Time
non-deterministic algorithm so this
problem is
innp uh
[Applause]
because if I have lucky guesses uh it's
kind of designed to solve this kind of
problem what I'm going to do is guess
whether whether X1 uh is true or
false so I have two choices and I'm
going to ask my machine to make the
right choice whether it should be true
or false then I'll guess
X2 each of these guess operations takes
constant time so I do it for every
variable and then I'm going to check
whether I happen to satisfy the
formula and if it comes out true then
I'll return yes and if it comes out
false I'll return
no and because NP is biased towards yes
answers it always finds a yes answer if
you can if there's some way to satisfy
the formula then I will get it if
there's some way to make the formula
come out true then this algorithm will
return yes
if there's no way to satisfy it then the
formula then the this non-deterministic
algorithm will return no that's just the
definition of how non-deterministic
machines work it's a little weird but uh
you can see from this kind of prototype
of a non-deterministic algorithm you can
actually always arrange for your
guessing to be at the
beginning and then you do some
polinomial regular polinomial time
checking without a deterministic
checking so when you rewrite your
algorithm like this with guesses up
front and then checking you can also
think of it as a verification algorithm
uh so you can say you know your friend
claims that uh this threat formula is
satisfiable meaning there's a way to set
the variable so that it comes out true
uh so this is called a satisfying
assignment satisfying just means make
true and you're like no I don't believe
you
your friend says no no no really it's
true and here's how I can prove it you
set X1 to false you set X2 to true you
set X3 basically they give you the
guesses and then you don't have to be
convinced that those are the right
guesses you can check that it's the
right guess you can compute this formula
in linear time see what the outcome is
if someone tells you what the XIs are
you can very quickly see whether that
was a satisfying assignment so you could
call this a solution and then there's a
polinomial Time verification algorithm
that checks that Solutions are valid but
you can only do that for yes answers if
your friend says no this is not
satisfiable they have no way of proving
it to you right I mean other than
checking all the the assignments
separately which should take exponential
time there's no easy way to confirm that
the answer to this problem is no but
there is an easy way to check that the
answer is yes namely I give you the
satisfying
assignment okay so this definition of NP
is what I'll stick to it's the sort
of I like guessing because it's like
dynamic programming with dynamic
programming we also guess um and
guessing actually originally comes from
this world
non-determinism um in dynamic
programming we don't allow this kind of
model and so we have to check the
guesses separately and so we spend lots
of time here magically you always get
the right guess in only constant time so
this is a much more powerful model of
course there's no computers that work
like this sadly
um or I guess more interestingly so uh
this is more about confirming that your
problem is not totally impossible at
least you can check the answers in
polinomial
time
so
that's something
is
so this is an equivalent definition of
NP because you can take a
non-deterministic algorithm and put the
guessing up top you can call the results
of those guesses a certificate that an
answer is yes and then you have a polom
a regular old deterministic polinomial
time algorithm that given that
certificate will verify uh that the that
it actually uh proves that the answer is
yes um yeah it's just that certificate
has to be polinomial size you can't
guess something of exponential size you
can only guess something of polinomial
size in this model okay so uh seems a
little weird uh but we'll see why this
is useful in a little
bit so let me go to mpty
completeness so if I have a problem X
it's NP
complete if x is in
NP and X is NP
hard but I haven't told you what NP hard
is maybe you remember from D6
but let me remind you
[Music]
uh so um I need to Define reduce so
maybe I'll do that as well then we can
talk about all these
okay a lot of definitions um but the
idea of NP hardness is very simple uh if
a problem X is NP hard it means that
it's at least as hard as uh sorry that
is a y it's at least as hard as all
problems in
NP okay I want intuitively X means it's
at least as hard as everything in NP
whereas being in NP is a positive
statement it says it's not too hard at
least there's a polinomial Time
verification algorithm so being an NP is
a
is good news it says you're no harder
than NP uh NP hard says you're at least
as hard as everything in NP and so NP NP
complete is a nice answer because it
says you're exactly as hard as
everything in NP no harder no easier uh
if you draw in this vague sense uh
computational
difficulty on one
axis which is not really accurate but I
like to do it anyway uh and you have uh
p is all of these easy problems down
here and NP is some larger set like this
uh NP hard is from here
over and this point right here is NP
complete okay being in NP means you're
left of this line or on the line and
being NP hard means you're right of this
line or on the line and MP complete
means you're right there so it's that's
a very definitive sense of hardness now
there is this slight catch which is we
don't know whether P equals NP so maybe
this is the same as this but probably
not unless you believe in luck basically
unless you imagine that a computer could
engineer luck and always guess the right
things without spending a lot of time
then P does not equal NP and in that
world what we get is that if you have an
NP complete problem or actually any NP
problem you know it cannot be in
P okay so if you have that X is NP
hard uh then you know that X is not in P
unless all of NP is in P so unless P
equals NP and most reasonable people do
not believe this and so instead they
have to believe this that your problem
is not polom
solvable so why is this true
uh because if your problem is NP hard
it's at least as hard as every problem
in
NP um and we and if you believe that
there's some problem in NP we don't
necessarily know which one but if
there's any problem out there in NP that
is not in
P then X has to be uh at least as hard
as it so it also requires uh non-p
polinomial time something larger than
polinomial time okay what does at least
as hard mean though we're going to
Define it in terms of reduction uctions
reduction from one problem to another is
just a polom Time algorithm regular
deterministic polom time that converts
an input to problem a into an equivalent
input to problem B equivalent means uh
that it has the same yes or no
answer okay we'll just be thinking about
decision problems
today
so why would I care about a reduction
because what it tells me is that if I
know how to solve problem B then I also
know how to solve problem a right if I
have a say a polinomial time algorithm
for solving B and I want one for a I
just take my a input I convert it into
the equivalent B input then I run my
algorithm for B and then it gives me the
answer to the a problem because the
answers are the same okay so if you have
a reduction like this uh and if say B
has a polinomial algorithm then so does
a because you can just convert a into B
and then solve
B uh also this works
for uh non-deterministic
algorithms okay not too
important but uh so what this tells us
is that in a certain sense get this
right
uh was is saying if I can solve B then I
can solve
a uh so this is saying
that uh B is at least as hard as
a I got that right a little
tricky uh so if we want to prove the
problem is NP hard what we do is show
that every problem in NP can be reduced
to the problem X so now we can go back
and say well if we believe that there's
some problem y that is in NP minus P if
there's something out here that is not
in
P then we can take that problem Y and by
this definition we can reduce it to X
because everything in NP reduces to X
and so then I can solve my problem my
problem Y which is in NP minus P by
converting it to X and solving X so that
means X better not have a polom Time
algorithm because if it did y would also
have a polinomial Time algorithm and
then in in general P would equal NP
because every problem in NP can be
converted to X so if x has a polom Time
algorithm then every problem y does
question
a ah so you're asking about the reverse
question if a is an NP can we conclude
the B is an NP and the answer is
no uh
because this reduction only lets us
convert from A to B it doesn't let us do
anything for converting from B to a so
if we know how to solve a and we also
know how to convert a into B it doesn't
tell us anything it could be B is uh a
much harder problem than a in that
situation sorry uh that's I think as
good as I can do for that other
questions
all right it is really tricky to get
these directions right so uh let me give
you a handy guide on how to not make a
mistake so maybe over
here what we care about from an
algorithmic perspective is uh proving
that problems are NP complete
because if we prove MP completeness I
mean really we care about MP hardness
but we might as well do MP completeness
most of the problems are that we'll see
MP hard or also MP
complete uh so when we prove this we
prove that there's basically no
polinomial time algorithm for that
problem so that's good to know because
then we can just give up searching for
polinomial time algorithm
uh so you know all the problems we've
seen so far have polinomial time
algorithms except a couple in your
problem sets which were actually MP
complete and the best you could have
done was exponential unless P equals
NP so uh here's how you can prove this
kind of lower bound to say look I don't
need to look for algorithms anymore
because my problem is just too hard it's
as hard as everything in
NP so this is just a summary of those
definitions the first thing you do is
prove that X is NP in NP the second
thing you do is prove that X is NP hard
and to do that you
reduce
from some known NP complete
problem or I guess NP hard but we'll use
NP
complete to your problem X maybe I'll
give this a name one
y okay so to prove that X is an NP you
do something like what we did over here
which is to give a non-deterministic
algorithm or you can think of it as
defining what the certificate is and
then giving a polinomial time uh
verification
algorithm so sort of two meth two
approaches you give a non-deterministic
polinomial Time algorithm
or you give uh certificate and a
verifier there's no right or wrong
certificate I mean a certificate you can
Define however you want as long as the
verifier can actually check it and when
it says yes then the answer to the
problem was yes so it's really the same
thing just want to say there's some
certificate that a verifier could
actually
check okay so that's proving your
problem is in NP it's sort of an
algorithmic thing the second part is all
about reductions now the definition says
that I should reduce every problem in NP
to my problem X that's tedious because
there are a lot of problems in the world
so I don't want to do it for every
problem in NP I'd like to just do it for
one now if I reduce sorting to my
problem that's not very interesting it
says my problem is at least as hard as
sorting okay but I already know how to
solve sorting but if I start from an NP
complete problem
then I know by the definition that every
problem in NP can be reduced to that
problem and if I show how to reduce the
NP complete problem to me then I know
that I'm NP complete too because if I
have any problem Z in NP by the
definition of NP complete of Y I can
reduce that to
Y and then if I have if I can build a
reduction from y to X then I get this
reduction and so that means I can
convert any problem in NP to my problem
X which means X is NP hard that's the
definition so all this is to say the
first time you prove a problem as MP
complete in in the world this happened
in the 70s um by
cook basically he proved that threat is
MP
complete uh that was annoying because he
had to start from any problem in NP and
he had to show that you could reduce any
problem in NP to three set but now that
that hard work is done done our life is
much easier and in this class all you
need to think about is picking your
favorite MP complete problem three sets
a good choice for almost anything but
we'll see a bunch of other problems
today from here and then reduce from
that known problem to your problem that
you're trying to prove is NP hard if you
can do that you know your problem is
empty
hard okay so we only need one reduction
for each hardness result which is nice
and this picture is a collection of
reductions we're going to start from
threat I'm not going to prove that MP
complete though I'll give you a hint of
why that's true we're going to reduce it
to Super Mario Brothers we're going to
reduce it to three-dimensional matching
we're going to reduce threedimensional
matching to subset sum to partition to
rectangle packing to jigsaw puzzles um
we're going to do all those reductions
hopefully
and that's proving uh NP hardness of all
those problems they're also all in
NP all
right
so uh 30 30 second intuition why threat
is NP hard well uh if you have any
problem in NP that means there is one of
these uh non-deterministic polinomial
time
algorithms or there is some verifier
given a polinomial size certificate so
that verifier it's just some algorithm
and you know software and Hardware are
basically the same thing right so you
can convert that algorithm into a
circuit that implements the algorithm
and if I have a circuit with like ANS
and ores and Knots I can convert that
into a Boolean formula with ANS ores and
Knots circuits and formulas are about
the same and if I have a formula uh fun
fact although this is a little less
obvious you can convert it into this
form the an an and of triple
ORS okay and once you've done that that
formula is equivalent to the original
algorithm uh and the inputs to the to
that verification algorithm the
certificate are represented by these
variables XIs and so deciding whether
there's some way to set the XIs to make
the formula true is the same thing as
saying is there some certificate where
the verifier says yes which is the same
thing as saying that uh the problem has
answer yes okay so given an NP algorithm
one of these non-deterministic funny
algorithms we can convert it into a
formula satisfaction problem and that's
how you prove three sat is MP complete
but to do that can take many lectures so
uh I'm not going to do the detail
the the main annoying part is being
formal about what exactly an algorithm
is uh which we don't do in this class so
um if you're interested take
6045 so which is some people are
actually in the overlap this semester um
cool let's do some reductions this is
where things get fun so we're going to
start with reducing threat to Super
Mario
Brothers uh so I I assume how many
people have played Super Mario Brothers
easy one I hope if you haven't played
you've seen it uh because we're going to
rely very much on Super Mario Brother
physics which I hope is fairly intuitive
but uh if you haven't played you should
obviously and we're going to reduce
threat to Super Mario Brothers
now uh this this is a a theorem by uh uh
bunch of people one MIT grad student
myself and a couple other collaborators
outside if not at MIT um and it of
course the this result holds for all
versions of Super Mario Brothers so far
released I think uh the proofs are a
little bit different for each one
especially Mario 2 which is its own
universe but
um I'm going to talk about the original
Super Mario Brothers NES classic which I
grew up with um
so now the real Super Mario Brothers is
you know on a 320 by 240 screen it's a
little bit small once you go right you
can't go back left except in the Maze
levels anyway uh so I need to generalize
a little bit because uh if you assume
that the the screen size of Super Mario
Brothers is constant in fact you can
Dynamic program your way through and
find the optimal solution in polinomial
time uh so I need to generalize a little
bit to uh arbitrary board size arbitrary
screen
size so in fact my entire level will be
in one
screen no
scrolling never mind this is a sides
scrolling Adventure uh and so that's my
generalized problem and I claim this is
n hard if I give you a level and I want
to and I ask you can you get to the end
of this level that problem is NP hard
okay also no time limit uh the time
limit would be okay but you have to
generalize it instead of 300 seconds or
whatever it has to be an arbitrary
value okay uh so how are we going to do
this we're going to reduce from threat
to Super Mario Brothers so that means
I'm given I don't get to choose I'm
given one of these formulas and I have
to convert it into an equivalent Super
Mario Brother instance so I have to
convert it into a level a hypothetical
level of Super Mario Brothers given
formula I have to build a level that
implements that
formula okay so here's what it's going
to look like I'm going to start out
somewhere here's here's my drawing of
Mario uh Mario uh or you could play
Luigi it doesn't matter um first thing
it's going to do is enter a little black
box called a variable
okay this is supposed to represent let's
call it
X1 okay and so there's it's some black
box I'm going to tell you what it is in
a moment and it has two outputs there's
the true output and the false output and
the idea is that Mario has to choose
whether to set X1 to true or
false okay let me show you that
Gadget so here's the oops upside down
here's the variable Gadget
uh so here's Mario uh could enter from
this way or that way we'll need a couple
of entrances in a moment and then uh
falls down once Mario's down here if you
check the jump height you cannot get
back up to here so this is like a oneway
once you're down here you have a choice
should I fall to the left or fall to the
right and if you make these Falls large
enough uh once you fall you can't
unfall uh so once you make a choice of
whether I leave on the true exit or the
F exit false exit that's a permanent
choice you can't undo it unless you can
come back to here but we'll set up so
that never happens so uh I mean if
you're trying to solve the level you you
don't know which way to go you have to
guess okay go fall to the left or fall
to the right or or do something um so uh
the existence of a playthrough this
level is the same as saying there is a
choice for the X1 variable now we have
to do this for lots of
variables uh so there's the X2 variable
X3 variable and so on
each one has a true exit and a false
exit Okay so the actual level will have
n instances of this if we have n
variables now uh what do I do once Mario
decides that this is a true thing uh
what I'm going to do is have this is
called a gadget by the way in general
most NP hardness proofs use these things
called gadgets which is just saying we
take various features of the input and
we convert them into corresponding
features in the output so here I'm
taking each variable X1 X2 X3 and so on
and building this little gadget for each
of those variables now the other thing
the other main thing you have in threat
are the Clauses we have triples of
variables or they negations that kind of
come have to come together and be
satisfied one of them has to be true so
down here I'm going to have some Clause
gadgets I will show you in a moment
okay and I think I'll switch colors is
about to get messy so the idea is that
some of the Clauses have X1 in them X1
with a true the true version of X1 not
X1 bar okay so for those clauses I want
to connect I'm going to dip into the
Clause briefly so from this wire I'm
going to dip into the Clause here and
then I'm going to go to the next Clause
that has X1 uh maybe it's this one and
the next one and so on okay all the
Clauses that have X1 in it I I dip into
the other ones I don't and then once I'm
done I'm going to come back and feed
into
X2 okay uh next I look at this false
wire for X1 so all the Clauses that have
X1 bar in them I'm going to connect so I
don't know which one they are maybe this
one and this one
something okay and then come
here okay so the idea is that Mario
makes a choice whether X1 is true or
false if X1 is true it's going to visit
Mario is going to visit all of the
Clauses that have X1 true in them and
then it's going to go to the X2 Choice
then it's going to choose whether X2 is
true or false and repeat okay or X1 or
Mario decides X1 should be false that
will satisfy all the Clauses that have
X1 equal X1 bar in
them and then again we we feed back into
X2 so this is why we have two inputs
into the X2 Gadget one of them is when
the previous variable was true the other
is when the previous variable is false X
the choice of X2 doesn't depend on the
choice of X1 so they feed into the same
thing and you have to make your choice
okay so uh so far so good now the
question is what's happening in these
clauses
and then there's
uh yeah one other aspect which is after
you've set all of the variables at the
very end after this last variable
xn uh at the very end what we're going
to do is come and go through all the
Clauses and then this is the flag this
is where you win the level sorry I drew
it backwards but the the goal is for
Mario to start here and get to
here in order to do that you have to be
able to Traverse through these closes so
what do the claes look like uh this is a
little bit more
elaborate so here we
go magnets um this is a clause Gadget so
there are three ways to dip into the
Clause it's actually upside down
relative to that picture but that's not
a
problem so uh if Mario comes here uh
then he can hit the question mark from
below and inside this question mark is
an invincibility star the invincibility
star will come up here and just Bounce
Around forever okay we checked the star
will just stay there for as long as you
let it sit unfortunately all of these
are solid blocks so Mario can't actually
get up to here to get the star okay but
as long as Mario can visit this question
mark or this question mark or this
question mark then there will be at
least one star up here so the idea is
that each of these represents one of the
literals that's in the clause and if we
choose so let's say let's look at this
first Clause X1 or X3 or X6 bar so if we
choose X1 to be true then the then we'll
follow the path and we'll be able to hit
the star or if we choose X3 to be true
then we'll come in here and hit this
star okay or if we choose X6 to be false
then that path will lead to here and
we'll be able to hit this question mark
and get the star up here so as long as
we satis the Clause there will be at
least one star won't help if you have
multiple
stars then uh the final traversal part
so that was this first clause and now
we're traversing through actually in
this picture it's left to right uh just
turn your head um and so now Mario's
going to have to Traverse this gadget
from left to right on this top part and
if Mario comes in here and you can
barely jump over that if there's a star
you can collect the star and then run
through all of these flaming uh bars of
death uh if there's no star you can't
you'll die if you try to Traverse so in
order to be able to Traverse all these
Clauses they must all be true and them
all being true is the same as their and
being true so you will be able to
survive through all these Clauses if and
only if this formula has a satisfying
assignment the satisfying assignment
would be given to you by the uh the
level play the choices that Mario makes
in this gadget will tell you whether X
each variable should be true or
false okay so uh to elaborate just a
little bit more in general when you have
a reduction like this to prove that it
actually works you need to check two
things you need to check that if there
is a way to satisfy this formula then
there is a way to play this level and
then conversely you need to show that if
there's a way to play this level then
the formula has a satisfying assignment
so for that latter part in order to
check
uh in order to convert a level play into
a satisfying assignment you just check
which way Mario falls in each of these
gadgets left or right that tells you the
variable assignment and because of the
way the Clauses work uh you'll only be
able to finish the level if there was at
least one star here and stars run out
after some time so you have you can
barely make it through all the Flaming
bars of death then you get to the next
Clause you need another star for each
one conversely if there is a satisfying
assignment you can actually play through
to the level you just make these choices
according to what the satisfying
assignment is so either way it's
equivalent we always get uh a yes or no
answer here uh whenever we get a yes
corresponding yes or no answer to the
threet problem okay you also need to
check that this reduction is polinomial
size it generates a pol or it can be
computed in polinomial time so there's
an issue given this thing you have to
like lay this out in a grid and draw all
these wires and there's one problem here
which is is these wires cross each
other and that's that's a little awkward
because these wires are basically just
long Tunnels for Mario to walk through
but what does it mean to have a Crossing
wire I really if Mario's coming this way
I don't want them to be able to go up
here he has to go straight otherwise
this reduction won't work so I need
what's called a crossover Gadget and
everywhere here I have a Crossing I have
a
crossover and this Gadget has to
guarantee that I can go through one way
or the other way but there's no leakage
from One path to the other path actually
if if I if I first Traverse through here
and then I Traverse through here it's
okay if I leak back because once I visit
a wire it's kind of done but uh I can't
have leakage if only one of them is
traversed so this is the last
Gadget uh the most complicated of them
all so this took a while to construct as
you might imagine um
so this is what we call a uh
unidirectional crossover you can either
go from left to right or from bottom to
top but you cannot go from bottom to
right or bottom to left or left to
bottom that kind of thing okay so I'm
told that Mario's only going to enter
from here to here because all of these
wires I can make oneway wires I only
have to think about going in a
particular direction I could have Falls
to force Mario to only go one way along
these wires
and uh so let me show you the valid
traversals um maybe the simplest one is
from here so let's say Mario comes in
here Falls so can't backtrack can jump
up here and then if Mario's big he can
break this block break this block but if
he's big uh oh there should be a couple
more zigzags here uh let's try to run
you can you can Crouch slide through
here uh but then you'll sort of lose
your momentum and you won't be able to
go through all these traversals as big
Mario
okay so uh you can break these blocks
and then get up to the top and leave or
if big Mario comes from over this way
you can first take a damage become small
Mario then you can fit through these
Wiggly blocks but uh you cannot break
blocks anymore as small Mario so once
you've committed to going small uh you
have to stay small until you get to here
and then you can get a there's a
mushroom in this block so you can get
big again and then you can break this
block and leave okay but once you're big
you can't backtrack because big Mario
can't fit through these tiny tubes see
it clear
right so uh slight detail which is at
the beginning we need to make Mario big
so there's a little mushroom I think
they have three spots uh at the
beginning and also at the end there has
to be something like this that checks
that you actually have a mushroom so the
only time you're allowed to take damage
is briefly in this gadget you take
damage if you tried to backtrack you
would get stuck there's a long fall here
uh and then you have to get the mushroom
so you can escape again okay so at the
end there's like a
mushroom uh
check make sure you have it so most of
the time Mario's big and just in these
little crossovers you have to make these
decisions this would make a giant level
but it is polinomial
size probably quadratic or
something okay therefore Super Mario
Brothers is NP heart
so uh if you want more fun examples like
this you should check out 6890 the class
I taught last semester which has online
video lectur soon to be on open
courseware so you can play with that any
questions about
Mario all right I hope you'll all play
um
so next topic uh is a problem you
probably haven't heard about uh
three-dimensional
matching this is a kind of a graph
Theory problem U it's we're going to
call it 3dm for short uh and you've seen
matching problems based on Flow matching
problems are usually about pairs of
things you're pairing them up
uh which you might call two-dimensional
matching that can be solved in
polinomial time but if you change two to
three and you're tripling things up then
suddenly the problem becomes NP complete
so uh it's a useful starting
point similar to
threat so you're given
um you're given set X of n elements a
set y of n elements and a set Z of n
elements no none of them are shared uh
but more importantly you are given a
bunch of
triples these are the allowable
triples uh so we'll call the set of
allowable triples uh T and so we're
looking at the cross product this is the
set of all triples X Y and Z or X is and
X Y is and Y and Z is and z uh but not
all triples are allowed only some subset
of triples is is allowed and your goal
is
to choose among those subsets sorry
among those
triples a subset of the triples so we're
trying to choose a subset s of
t such
that um every
element so the things in x y and z are
called elements so I'm just taking
somebody in the union
XYZ um it should be
in
exactly
one uh triple s in big
S okay uh this is a little weird but you
can think of this problem as you have uh
an alien race with three genders male
female neuter I guess those are the X Y
and Z there's an equal number of each
and your goal and and every triple
reports to you whether that is a
compatible matching who knows what
they're doing all three of them um so
you're told up front you you take a
survey there's only NCB different
triples for each of them they say yeah
i' do that um so you given that subset
and now your goal is to permanently
triple up these guys
and everybody wants to be in exactly one
triple so it's a monogamous race imagine
um so you want to everybody wants to be
put in one triple but only one triple
okay and the question is is this
possible this is threedimensional
matching certainly not always going to
be possible but sometimes it is uh if it
is you want to answer yes if it's not
possible you want to answer
no this problem is NP complete uh why is
it an NP uh because I can basically
guess which elements of T are in s
there's only at most n cubed of them so
for each one I just guess yes or no is
that element of T in s and then I check
whether this coverage constraint holds
so that's very easy prove this is
innp the challenge is to prove that it's
NP hard and we're going to do that again
by reducing from uh three set
bye
Mario uh so we're going to make a
reduction from threat to
three-dimensional matching direction is
important always reduce from the thing
you know is hard reduce to the thing you
don't know as hard so again we're given
a formula we want to convert that
formula into an equivalent
threedimensional matching
input so the formula has variables and
Clauses for each variable we're going to
build a gadget that looks like this uh
and for each Clause we're going to build
a gadget so here's what they look
like if we have a variable say XI we're
going to convert that into this
picture uh
yeah stay monochromatic for
now looks pretty crazy at the moment um
but it's not so
crazy this is not supposed to be obvious
you have to think for a while it's a
puzzle to figure out this kind of thing
uh but I call this thing a variable
Gadget because locally so um so there's
basically a A Wheel in the center here
and then there's these extra dots for
every pair of dots consecutive pair of
dots in the wheel okay and what I've
drawn is the set of triples that are
allowed there's tons of other triples
which are forbidden uh the triples that
are in t are the ones that I draw as
little triangles okay and I two-color
them because they're exactly two ways to
solve this gadget locally now these dots
are going to be connected to other
gadgets but these dots only exist in
this gadget which means they've got to
be covered they've got to be covered
exactly once so either you choose the
blue uh triangles or you choose the red
triangles that each of them will exactly
cover each of these guys once um you
cannot mix and match red and blue
because you'd either get overlap if you
choose two guys that share point or
you'd miss one if I choose like this
blue and this red then I can't cover
this point because both of these would
overlap those two and over here you have
to choose disjoint triples they can't
overlap at all and uh everybody has to
get covered so just given those
constraints locally you can see you have
to choose red or blue guess what one of
them is true the other one is false okay
let's say that red is true and blue is
false in general when you trying to
build a variable Gadget you build
something that has exactly two solutions
one representing true one representing
false now how big do I make this this
wheel uh big
enough uh one you could make it as big
as the number of Clauses I'm going to
make it uh into 2 nxi so uh
wheel and uh this number is the number
of occurrences
of
XI in the
formula so this is the number of Clauses
that contain either XI or x i
bar that's n XI I'm going to double that
because when I get over here is
basically XI being uh true
for those
guys uh
actually yeah that's actually right
looks backwards
um and false for these
guys one way or the other we'll figure
it out
um so I basically in order for XI to
appear in say five different clauses I
want five of the true things and five of
the false things and so I need to double
in order to get uh I potentially have
twice I have twice as many as I actually
need but this way I'm guaranteed to have
false or true whichever I need okay in
the in reality have some true
occurrences I have some false
occurrences some x1's some X1 bars this
will guarantee that I have enough of
these uh free points to connect into my
Clause gadgets okay how do I do a clause
Gadget it's actually really
easy so these would be pretty boring by
themselves
uh so claw always looks like this maybe
there's some
negations uh yeah let's do something
like
that I'm going to convert it into a very
simple
picture it's going to be XI Dot and XJ
bar Dot and XK Dot and
then uh well maybe I'll stick to these
colors
okay again uh these two points only
appear in this Clause Gadget these dots
are actually these dots so there you
know there's one of these pictures for
X1 there's another one for X2 X3 and so
XI has one of these wheels I want this
dot to be one of these dots of the wheel
and then uh I want this dot to be one of
the dots in the XJ wheel with the false
setting one the red dots I want this one
to be a XK true setting in the XK wheel
okay so these things are all connected
together in a complicated pattern but
the point is I within this gadget I only
have three uh allowed triples and these
points only appear in this gadget which
means they have to be covered in this
gadget uh they can be covered by this
triple or this triple or this triple but
once you choose one you can't choose the
others okay what this means is if I I
set XI to be true it leaves Behind these
points marked true if I choose the red
things then it's the blue points that
are left behind leaving points behind in
this case is going to be good because
this clause in order to satisfy this
clause in order to choose one of these
three triples at least one of these must
be uh left behind by the wheel if all of
these are covered by their wheels then
there's no way I can't choose any of
these guys but if at least one of these
is left behind by the wheel then uh I
can choose the corresponding triple and
cover these points so I'll be able to
cover these points if and only if uh at
least one of these is true and that's a
clause that's what a clause is supposed
to do in three set if at least one of
these is true then the Clause is
satisfied I need all the Clauses to be
satisfied because I need to cover all of
these points for all the instances of
these
Clauses and that's how it works now
slight catch uh if you do this not all
the points will be covered even so
uh right maybe all of these are true so
they're all left behind and I can only
cover one of them with the Clause so
little messy uh you need another
Gadget which is called garbage
collection I don't want to spend too
much time on it uh but you have uh two
dots
and then you have every
single
uh XI uh these these dots uh all true
and false
dots and you're going to have this
triple and this triple and this triple
and this triple and so on it looks an
awful lot like a clause uh but this is
like a clause that's connected to
everybody in the entire universe and you
repeat this the appropriate number of
times which is uh something like sum of
NX uh minus the number of
Clauses okay why because if you look at
a wheel it has size 2 * NX uh for
variable
X and half of the points will be left
uncovered
okay so that means NX of them will be
uncovered then the Clause if everything
works out correctly the Clause will
cover exactly one of those
points uh so each for each Clause we
cover one of the points that means this
this difference is exactly how many
points are left uncovered and so we make
this gadget exactly that many times and
it's free to cover anybody so whatever's
left over this garbage collector will
clean up and if we use exactly the right
number of them this garbage collector
won't run out of things to collect okay
so this is this makes the proof messy
but uh I want to move on to somewhat
simpler proofs and for other problems
yeah uh real quick what about the key or
points that we didn't cover because we
didn't actually need that many right so
this this also includes the points that
weren't even connected to Clauses uh it
I think this is the right number no
matter what because this is counting the
total number of uncovered whether
they're connected to Clauses or not each
Clause will in a satisfied situation it
will cover exactly one of those points
the ones that aren't connected to
Clauses won't be covered at all but that
will still be in this difference so yeah
it's good to check that I the first time
I wrote this down I forgot about those
points and got it wrong but I think this
is right
hopefully I did not come up with this
proof uh Gary and Johnson I think or no
this is a I forget this is a yeah this
is a Gary and Johnson proof there's a
cool book from L 7s by Gary and Johnson
does a lot of mp
completeness uh you're curious all right
so hopefully you believe
three-dimensional matching is hard now
I'm going to use it to prove that some
very different types of problems are
hard this is a kind of graph Theory
problem uh you'll see more graph Theory
problems in
recitation uh at this point I can erase
threat and
Mario so
uh in in the world most NP hardness
proofs are reductions from threat or
some variation of threat in some sense
you can think of threedimensional
matching is kind of like a version of
threat uh but it's a little bit more
stringent and that that stringency helps
us do other
reductions so here's another problem
where we'll reduce from
three-dimensional
matching it's called subset sum
uh so you're given n
integers
A1 up to a
n and you're given a Target sum also an
integer call it
t what you'd like to know is is there a
subset of the integers that adds up to
that Target
can you choose some of the integers so
that I'll write it the sum of s but what
this means is the sum over the AIS that
are in s of the value
AI I want that to equal T so this is a
definition this is the
constraint so I give you a bunch of
numbers do any subset of them add up to
T that's all this is asking this problem
is NP hard uh it's NP complete in fact I
mean you can guess which integers should
go in the subset and then add them up
see if you got it
right uh it's it is NP hard but it's
something special we call a weekly NP
hard and why don't I come back to the
definition of that in a
moment let me first show you the proof
it's actually really easy once now that
we have this three-dimensional matching
problem uh that's pretty cool so these
numbers are going to be huge um what
we're going to say
is let's view so again we're given three
dimensional matching instance right to
get the directions right we're given a
set of triples we want to solve this
problem by reducing it to uh subset sum
so we get to construct integers that
represent
triples that's what we're going to do so
uh here we
go we get to choose the number so I'm
going to think of them in a particular
base uh B which is going to be 1 plus
the
max of the NX
I so again this is the number of
occurrences of variable X I in a true or
false form so I take the maximum
occurrence of any variable add one
that's my base just has to be large
enough okay
and this is basically the entire
reduction and is one
line if I have three
triples uh if I have a triple x i XJ XK
I'm going to convert that into a number
that looks like this
where the one
positions are I don't really know the
order but they are i j and
k everything else is zero and this is in
base B not base 2 okay it's a little
weird all my digits are zero or one but
I'm in base B and three of the digits
are one and the rest are zero why
because of my target sum Target sum is
going to be 1 one one one one one one
one one
one okay so uh you this number you in
algebra You' write this as B to the I
plus b to the J plus b to the K this you
would write as the sum of B to the I for
all
I do you see why this works it's
actually really simple um when I if I'm
so
choosing for this instance my my goal is
to choose a subset of these numbers that
add up to this number how could that
possibly happen well I've got to choose
every time I choose one of the numbers
those three digits get set to one in my
sum if I ever have a collision if I add
two ones together I'm going to get a two
that's not good because once I get a two
I'll never be able to get back to a one
because my base is really
big uh this base is designed so that the
total this is the total number of
colliding ones
so we set it one larger than that which
means you'll never get a carry when
you're adding up in this base that's why
I set the base to be something large not
base two base two might work but this is
much
safer uh so what that means is for each
of these ones in the in the Target sum
I've got to find a triple that has those
ones and those triples can't overlap so
that means choosing a set of numbers
that add up to this is exactly the same
as choosing a set of triples that covers
all of the elements
done super easy once you have the right
problem okay good now why do I call this
weekly NP hard because these numbers are
giant uh if I have uh how's it go if I
have n elements in XYZ over there I
guess I here they're called x i y k ZK
sorry maybe I should have called them
that here doesn't matter
uh if I have n of those elements in x x
Union y Union Z the number of digits
here is
n right so
the the number of
digits is order n this is fine from an
MP completeness standpoint this is
polinomial size the number of digits in
my numbers is is uh polinomial and this
base is also pretty small so if you
wrote it out in binary it would also be
polinomial just lose a log Factor okay
but the size of the numbers the actual
values of the
numbers uh is
exponential okay with weak NP hardness
that's allowed with strong NP hardness
that's forbidden in strong NP hardness
you want the values of the numbers to be
polom so in this case number of bits is
small but the actual values are are
giant okay because you have to
exponentiate it would be cool and this
problem is only weekly andb hard maybe
you actually know a pseudo polinomial
time algorithm for this it's basically
napsack if these numbers are have
polinomial
value then uh you can basically in your
sub problems in dynamic programming you
can uh write down the the number T and
just solve it for all values of T and
then it's easy to solve it in polinomial
time polom in the uh integer values so
we call that pseudo polinomial because
it's not really polinomial it's not
polinomial in the number of digits you
have to write down the number polinomial
and the values weak andp hardness goes
together with pseudo
polinomial um they're kind of that's
kind of a matching results say look
pseudo polinomial is the best you can do
you can't hope for polinomial because if
you let the numbers get huge then uh the
problem is NP complete but if you force
the numbers to be small this problem is
easy so uh subset sum is a little funny
in that
sense
uh
cool I think I'm
gonna yeah
[Applause]
let me tell you about another
problem
partition so partition is pretty much
the same setup I'm given and integers
uh let's say they're positive and I want
to
know is their subset I'm not given a
Target sum t uh Target sum is basically
forced what I would like is uh the sum
of all the values in s to equal the sum
of all the values not in s that's a
minus s okay which in other words is
going to be the sum of all the values in
a divid by two so this is called
Partition because you're taking a set
you're splitting it into two halves of
equal sum every element has to go in one
of the two halves and you they're called
S and A minus s it's like cuts from in
the flow stuff uh and you want those two
halves to have exactly the same sum
which means they will be the sum divided
two so that better be even it's not
going to be possible so again you want
to decide this whether this is possible
or impossible yes or
no okay I claim this problem is also
weekly NP complete and we can reduce
from subset sum to
partition this is a little interesting
because partition is actually a special
case of subset sum right it is the case
where T equals
this okay subset sum you're trying to
solve it no matter what T is T is a
given input so there's more instances
over here some of them some of these
instances are the case where T equals
the sum over two those are partition
instances so this is like a subset of
the possible inputs as over there which
means this problem is easier than this
one in a no harder
anyway uh in other words I can reduce
partition to subset sum right I just
compute this value and set that to T and
then leave the A's alone
that will reduce partition to subset sum
but that's not the direction I want I
want to reduce from subset sum a problem
I can prove is MP compete to partition
because I want to prove that partition
is empty complete so in this case
there's an easy reduction in in both
directions uh this direction is a little
harder so uh
reduction from subset sum
so I'm given a bunch of AIS I'm not
going to touch them and I'm given a
Target sum T and I basically want to
make that Target sum into this half to
do that I'm going to add two
numbers to my set so I'm going to let uh
Sigma be the sum of the given
A's okay and then I'm going to add so
I'm given A1 through a n I'm going to
add uh an a n minus a a n+ one is going
to
be uh Sigma + T and I'm going to
add uh a n +
2 to be 2 Sigma minus
t
Okay uh why so these are two basically
huge
numbers uh because Sigma is bigger than
I mean it's the sum of all the numbers
so it's bigger than all of them
and so uh imagine for a moment that I
put these two in the same side of the
partition I put them both in s or i put
them both out of s their sum by
themselves is three sigma right the t's
cancel whereas all the other items their
sum is Sigma so I'm I'm I'm host if I
have three sigma on one side and sigma
on the other I'm not going to make them
equal okay so in fact these two elements
have to be on opposite sides so there's
a side that has Sigma plus T there's a
side that has 2 Sigma minus
t and then there's all the other n items
and some of them are going to go to this
side some of them are going to go to
this
side their total value is Sigma right
now this is close to Sigma this is close
to two Sigma so they have to kind of
meet in the middle in fact what you'll
have to do is add
uh Sigma minus t over
here and
add uh T over here okay think about it
for a second if I add Sigma minus t this
comes out to two Sigma if I add T to
this this comes out to two Sigma that
would be good because they're equal and
notice that this is Sigma minus t this
is T their sum is Sigma so in fact it
has to be like this you have to you add
something over here and sigma minus
something over here for all the other
AIS and the something has to be T in
order for these two values to
equalize so in order to solve this
slightly larger partition problem you
have to actually solve the subset some
problem because you have to con you have
to construct a subset that adds up to t
t was an arbitrary given value so this
is pretty nifty um we're adding some
values so that the new Target sum is the
50/50 split uh when we're given some
values that had an arbitrary Target
sum all right so partition is weekly and
complete let me go
to rectangle packing
so rectangle packing I'm going to draw
the picture uh I give you a bunch of
rectangles of varying
sizes and I give you a Target
rectangle it's called T these are the
RIS I want to put these rectangles into
this
picture uh without any
overlaps okay this each of these
rectangles here corresponds to what of
the rect re angles over here so uh I'll
tell you that all these re the sum of
the areas of these rectangles is equal
to the area of T and the question is can
you pack those rectangles into T without
any overlaps and therefore without any
gaps the areas are exactly the same I
claim this problem is weakly NP hard I
guess NP complete the um by a reduction
from partition
this will be super
easy if you followed what the definition
of partition is we're given some numbers
some integers Ai and we're going to take
each of them and convert them into a uh
let's say 1 by 3 AI rectangle three is
to avoid some rotation we'll see and
then uh we're also given the Target or
no target sum is given uh Target sum is
the sum over two but anyway uh we're
going to build our Target uh rectangle
to
be it's actually going to be really big
but uh it's going to be uh
two by 3 * t uh so this is that thing so
this is three Hales sum of the
A's
okay that's about it uh in order to pack
these rectangles into here because each
of them is at least three long you
cannot pack them vertically they have to
be horizontal so in fact what you're
packing will look like is there'll be
the top half and the bottom half and the
top half the total lengths of those
rectangles has to add up to uh three
Hales sum of a everything was scaled up
by three so that's half of a on the top
and the bottom that's a partition in
order to pack the rectangles into here
you have to solve the partition problem
and vice versa
easy uh okay me show
you one more
thing jigsaw
puzzles this is uh not the jigsaw
puzzles you grew up on uh somewhat more
generalized um so a piece is going to
look something like
this okay uh I drew them intentionally
different um so on each you have a
square a unit Square some of the sides
can be uh flat some of them can be tabs
some of them can be Pockets each Tab and
pocket has a shape and they're not in a
perfect matching with each other so
there could be seven of these tabs and
seven of these pockets all the same
shape this is what you might call ambig
jigsaw puzzles plus there's no image on
the piece so this is like hardcore
jigsaw puzzles uh this is MP
complete and what I'd like to
do is to simulate a rectangle with a
bunch of Jigsaw pieces so it would look
something like
this okay if I have
a one by something rectangle I'm going
to simulate it with that same something
uh little jigsaw
pieces and I'm going to make these uh
shapes only match each other and so for
every
rectangle uh they're going to have a
little a different
shape okay this one will be squares at
that point I run out of shape so I can
easily draw but you get the idea each
rectangle has a different shape and so
these have to match to each other they
can't you can't mix the tiles which
which means you have to build this
rectangle you have to build this
rectangle and then if if the jigsa
problem is can you fit these into a
given rectangle then you get rectangle
packing but this is not a valid
[Music]
reduction you can't
reduce from
partition
why
because these numbers are huge
remember the values of the numbers in my
partition instance are exponential so if
I have a value Ai and it's exponential
in my problem size and I try to make AI
little tiles that means the number of of
Jigsaw pieces will be exponential in N
that's not good that's not
allowed this is why weak NP hardness is
annoying so
instead uh we need a strong NP hard
problem
this is a problem that's NP hard even
when the numbers are polinomial in value
not just in
size uh and this is called four
partition for partition you're given uh
an
integers as
usual uh say set is a and you want to
split those integers
into
n/4 uh
quadruples of the same
sum uh so this would be sum of a / n/4
that's your target sum so before we had
to split into two parts that had the
same sum that was partition now we have
to split into n over four parts each
part will have exactly four numbers four
integers and they should all have the
same sum this problem is hard even when
the integers have polinomial
value so the
values are uh at most some polinomial
and
N okay I won't prove it here but it's in
my lecture notes if you're curious It's
like this proof
but
harder um you end up instead of having
like igit numbers you have five-digit
numbers each digit is only has a
polinomial and N different values so the
total number of the total value of the
numbers is only polinomial it's like n
to the 5ifth or something good news is
that this reduction I just gave you uh
is also a reduction from four partition
because uh it's the same setup again I'm
given integers each integer I'm going to
represent by uh that many tiles now the
number of tiles is only polinomial so
this is a valid reduction and again if I
have to pack all of these tiles into a
rectangular board that's exactly the
same as packing these integers well I
guess I should do rectangle packing
again so this is a proof rectangle
packing was weakly n hard but in fact
it's strongly NP hard you just change
these Dimensions you say well uh I want
to I need uh whatever n over4 different
parts each of size the sum Over N over
four you need some scale factor here
three doesn't work use n
something n and n that will prove that
rectangle packing is actually strongly
NP hard because we're reducing from four
partition instead of partition and then
you can reduce rectangle packing to
jigsaw puzzles because you have strong
hardness over over here over here we
don't have numbers we just have these
pieces so whenever you convert from a
number problem to a non-number problem
uh if you're representing the numbers in
un which is what's going on here you
need strong NP hardness for it to work
weak NP hardness isn't enough then we
get jigsaw puzzles which you know and
love are empty
complete that's it